Welcome.
Hello.
Do you want anybody to come and join you, or are you in splendid isolation?
By myself, yeah.
That's the sort of support you need, isn't it?
We'll get everybody in, and then we'll get underway.
John Bray.
Look, if there's some particularly important people who need to sit around the
table, I think we're short of seats at the back rather than around the table.
Okay.
Welcome, Minister. Good to have you here.
Hello.
And hello.
And what we usually do is throw over to you for, say, five minutes or
so and then rip into questions. But-
Well, I won't take five minutes.
And I gather you've had some important announcements about now as well.
Yes. Well, I just wanted to highlight the fact that government's released the
response to the National Infrastructure Plan,
which the Infrastructure Commission, Te Waihanga,
issued in February
this year, and we are statutorily required to respond by the
20th of June. So we've met the law, which is always good, particularly when
you're the attorney.
Just to pull out a few highlights, I suppose.
The first point to make is,
I hope the committee agrees, I think you've been briefed on it.
The plan released by the commission as a
sobering wake-up call for many people,
outlines that we spend a lot on infrastructure, about 5.8% of GDP
annually over the last 20 years, one of the highest in the OECD, but we don't get a
lot of bang for buck. Real structural problems around asset management, for
example. We're fourth to last in the OECD for asset
management. Central government agencies don't understand what they own or have
long-term investment plans. And the cost of addressing our infrastructure deficit
as a country outstrips our ability to pay.
So there are 16 recommendations in the plan
and 10 priority areas, and the government's response
essentially endorses all 16 of the recommendations.
recommendations supported, 13 supported in principle.
I think it's heartening that a lot of what the government's already doing reflects
some of the recommendations in the plan, particularly the priorities.
So,
things like, for example, up zoning around
rapid transit and
key transport corridors, lifting hospital investments, spatial planning, national
adaptation, time of use pricing, fleet-wide road user charges, those
kind of recommendations, all those priorities are existing government policy.
In April, we also announced changes to the investment management system,
so to take external investment assurance
to the commission,
establishing a dedicated function inside the commission for capital-intensive
agencies, covering both long-term investment plans and
infrastructure asset management.
And then the other things I would pull out in terms of the government response
are governments agreed to review the land transport funding system.
There's quite a lot of good material in the National Infrastructure Plan
around
issues with land transport funding settings.
We've agreed to do a review, which will be led by MCERT, to be
publicly consulted on by June 2028.
We've also agreed to legislate for departments and Crown entities to publish
long-term investment plans and to report on asset management.
It's likely that will involve legislative amendment to the Public Finance Act and
the Crown Entities Act. There are existing
requirements through Cabinet Office Circular 23/9. Really rolls off the tongue.
The government's view is that
putting that into law makes a lot of sense and will lift
the quality of those over time. Done quite a lot of hard work on that in the last
two years. We now have long-term investment plans for many government agencies, but
we can do more, and having that as a
legal requirement, I think will make a difference.
There's also another couple of recommendations
about mandating
contributions to the national infrastructure pipeline, which I know is a thing that
people are interested in strengthening data quality over time.
The other point I'd make is that
we have deliberately tried to be nonpartisan
about this, and I want to thank
both Labour and the Greens for offering forewords to the government
response.
So got a ministerial foreword from me on behalf of the government and
forewords from both Labour Party infrastructure spokesperson and the Green Party
infrastructure spokesperson as well.
And so,
while I don't agree with everything in it, I think it'd be fair
to characterize it as broadly agreeing with the direction of travel, both in the
plan and the government's response as well.
So
I see this as part of
fixing the system settings that have led us to a pretty
uncomfortable place as a country
in terms of infrastructure investment.
And this is the kind of, some would say, boring,
but really important institutional system
reforms so that we do better over time.
And we framed it as a 30-year long-term plan, and if
we stick to the plan and implement the recommendations, we'll all be a better,
wealthier, more prosperous,
and more value for money country in the next 10, 20, and 30 years.
So thank you very much.
Thank you for that intro.
Kieran, you've got the first question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thanks very much for that. Credit to you.
I think it might have been this time last year, I said, "Why don't we work together
on including an opposition response to the plan," and
you've followed through with that. So thanks very much for that.
I'm just looking at it now, given it's just come through, and I see the
three areas that you support in principle:
predictable government funding signals, multi-year budgeting,
and
the coordinated workforce development.
Could you give us a rundown through those three as to
why you're not in a position to commit to the
recommendation?
The short point is we want to do a bit more work
on all of them. We
support all of them.
It's just,
do you want to commit to everything as part of that right now?
So if you take coordinated workforce development,
there's obviously a lot of work underway around industry skills boards
already.
MSD's already using the national infrastructure pipeline.
So we've just said in the response, the government will consider how to
implement this recommendation
by directing MB to work with the commission.
So I suppose, the point is there's just a bit of further work to do before we jump
in holus-bolus into exactly what the commission is recommending.
So we said, this is a nomenclature question, I
suppose. What does supportive mean compared to supportive in principle?
We just want to do a bit of further work on that.
Thank you. So the
work that is signaled on an assurance-
Yeah
... and we've signaled our support for that as well,
there's still some work to do in that.
Yeah.
Can you walk us through what's required from transferring from Treasury to
the commission and-
Yeah
... some specific time frames?
I'll make a couple of comments, and I might get Jeff and Chris.
Sorry, I should have introduced this.
Jeff Puke, CEO of Infrastructure Commission, Chris Bunny, DCE at
Treasury.
So yeah, so we've announced those big five changes,
in April. 1st of November is when you take over the assurance
functions. There's a bit of work to do between now and then around that.
So I might, Jeff first and then maybe Chris can talk about what that involves.
Yeah, so essentially, we're going to be bringing together best aspects
of the former gateway process,
which
high-risk, high-profile
projects go through currently.
And bring that together with the Infrastructure Priorities Program,
and essentially have one product for
high-risk, high-profile investments.
We are working through the details of what this means for things outside of central
government. You'll recall that
local government, the IPP was open to broader.
It will start just by being a central government-focused
program, but with options to expand it
thereafter.
So it's the back end between Treasury and you're working on the-
Sure
... what the assurance transitionalization looks like.
Yeah. So Treasury will be establishing the policy on what is required
under the program. So we're working currently with Treasury on what that looks
like, what projects are eligible for it, the time
frames involved in that, and so on.
And then the commission will essentially be responsible for implementing that
policy. I don't know if there's anything you want to add to that.
Yeah. Just to add, there's a few practical elements.
So, we don't want to cause confusion with agencies because this is assurance
for infrastructure projects. There's still digital projects and other change
projects as well.
There's with Jeff working through the access to the current
pool of gateway reviewers, just making sure that you don't drop anything on that in
a way. And then practical considerations, like some
infrastructure projects might have security classifications, so just making sure
that the settings are such that InfraCom's well-placed and
appropriate to pick those projects up as we go.
So it's mostly pretty mundane,
just detail of making sure that the system works come 1 November in a way that
doesn't see balls dropped at that point.
Sure.
Okay. Is that a start, or...
No, I'm going to go Dan, then Julianne.
Thanks,
Minister, for coming today.
You've just released the government's response to the infrastructure plan.
Just keen to get your sense on,
yeah, clearly there's 30 year program
of work, and it's over successive governments.
Mm-hmm.
What's
the update that you can provide to the committee around getting a
bipartisan agreement around the plan, but
also the pipeline of hundreds of projects?
Yeah.
How do we take the politics out of the infrastructure question and-
Yeah. As I said, we've worked
pretty hard, and Mr. McNulty's given an indication of that, we've worked pretty
hard to try and land a
degree of bipartisanship over the system settings.
And I think some of you have heard me say this before, I think
we probably tie ourselves up a bit too much over specific projects and
who supports X and Y. And
there's high-profile disagreements over projects, and
one of the ways you can avoid doing that
over time is to implement the recommendations of the plan.
So if you have proper long-term investment plans, proper asset management
plans, you have a proper assurance function.
Politicians don't go and announce projects before they're ready to be announced and
before they're ready to be funded.
If you can avoid all of that stuff and put in place all the institutional reforms
that we're doing through the response to the National Infrastructure Plan, and have
already started, frankly, you will lead to less
high-profile disagreements over time, and that's really important.
But at a more general level, I do think we probably fixate a bit too much about
specific projects like rail or
IREX or
whatever.
Actually, if you look at the national infrastructure pipeline, which is publicly
available for anybody to look at, and you can break it down by
area, class of activity, funding source,
implementation, construction, pre-planning.
There's a wealth of data there.
I'd put it to you that 97 to 98% of
what's in the pipeline, no one disagrees with.
Mm-hmm.
There's just water renewal work that has to happen, basic road maintenance,
culverts, bridge repairs, bridge replacements,
Eastern Busway, next stage has just been funded, that's been rolled out.
That's basically been a 20-year build.
Completely uncontroversial because it's a good project, it's been planned, and it's
taken too long. It's cost too much. But welcome to New Zealand infrastructure.
But it's just been rolling out, and no one really disagrees with it.
And so it's the high-profile stuff that we all fixate on,
and probably there's too much political argy-bargy over, but I reckon 98% of the
stuff in the pipeline is just pretty straightforward.
And one of the points I keep trying to make to people is there is an existing
pipeline. Everyone always goes, "Oh, we need a pipeline." It's like, well, there is
one. Everyone goes, "We need to be bipartisan." It's like, well,
I think that actually basically is bipartisan.
Mm-hmm.
And let's focus on getting the consensus
over the system reforms required.
And that's where I do think we are
starting to make some good progress.
So that's a positive thing, I think, for the country.
Good stuff. Just another question.
In addition to the 16 areas, you've
made some further actions around four different areas.
Do you want to talk us through those and-
Oh, well, the
16, the ones I wanted to pull out were the ones, just kind of what I just
mentioned, to be honest. So, the land transport funding review is
important. The long-term investment plans,
strengthening public sector leadership.
Those are the things that I kind of haven't talked about before,
and that we haven't previously given an indication on.
So,
those are important. One of the things I've learned in this job over the last
two and a half years or so is that
quality people make the system,
and
I think it'd be fair to say we need
greater capability inside the system at a project
level. Projects go wrong for lots of
reasons.
One big one is the quality of leadership at a
individual project level. And so the more we can lift capability
inside the Crown when it comes to delivery-
You know, that will be important. So there's some recommendations there that we've
endorsed. And there's a lot of things still to do around that.
Good stuff.
Juliane.
Thank you. Thanks, Minister.
I wanted to just ask about recommendation two, which is related to land
transport-
Yeah
... funding oversight.
And whether the
investment assurance infrastructure priority
program will be applied to all
major new capital projects in land transport that might
be committed to before the election.
So it
won't apply to NZTA's NLTF funded
user charge program. So, basically where
we've got to is 50% of transport spending is through the New
Zealand Transport Agency, so their board approved investment decisions made through
the National Land Transport Fund, which essentially user pays,
and they have
oversight over that, and they just make those investment decisions.
So it won't apply to that because,
we have NZTA as a Crown entity to make those investment decisions specifically for
a reason.
Where the Crown decides to invest Crown capital,
put more money into a project or series of projects,
the new system will apply to those, but it's not up and running till the 1st of
November.
Thanks.
So if you have a question-
After the election, yeah.
Well, yeah, as we've just canvassed 10 minutes or so ago,
there's a bunch of work to do between now and then.
Mm.
Yeah.
So just following up on that. Because
the way I read the recommendation,
land transport has been identified in the National
Infrastructural Plan as an area where
we haven't been spending enough on
maintenance and renewals, where we've been committing to lots of large
new capital projects.
The government's saying they've supported the National Infrastructural Plan's
recommendation, but actually they're not putting
major new capital land transport projects through the same process
that all other-
Well, the-
... projects would go through.
The, the-
Unless it's Crown funded
...
Well, I'm not sure that's fair. We've endorsed the recommendation, which
is,
if you read pages 64 through 70 of the, the National
Infrastructure Plan, it's a pretty sobering read around
the last 10 to 15 years of transport funding policy,
and it makes a pretty compelling case for how we've gone awry,
and we've endorsed the problems that have been identified by the commission, and
we've endorsed doing a review to try and sort it out.
So, that is pretty significant.
There's a lot of funding-
A lot of work to do
... going into
transport projects and about transport NLTP.
Yes.
That's Crown funding.
But so
the projects that are tagged to Crown funding will go through that
process, but not the ones that are in theory other-
Well, the ones in the most recent budget,
won't, because the-
Okay, yeah, because they're already-
You're talking about Cambridge?
Just, yeah. Earlier
we were just going through the supplementary estimates.
I-
And there was quite a large Crown
injection to the NLTP last year
... Yeah. Those stakes-
Like 5 billion over five years
... Well, it goes back through-
Yeah
... really, to be honest, without being too political about it, really started
through the upgrade program.
This existed before then, but
the upgrade program back in 2020
supercharged it. We now call it MSIP.
But this government's put Crown capital into transport too.
The reality is, you know this as well as I do, that there's not enough
revenue in the system to pay for every thing that people want to do.
Yes.
So I'll be really upfront about that.
So can I just ask though, there's also a specific recommendation
around prioritizing and sequencing land transport
projects. Is that something that we will see
from the government before the election, or?
See what?
Like, what the prioritization and sequencing of major land transport
projects.
Well,
NZTA has that already.
Oh, NZTA has already decided the prioritization?
NZTA has what's called the National Land Transport Plan.
They have a program of that already, and we're now going to do a
review of land transport funding in light of the problems
identified by the commission.
And will that review be independent from NZTA or?
Well, they'll be involved in it, but, yes, it will be. It won't be done by them.
We're reviewing them, so it won't be done by them.
Okay. But-
Though they'll be involved
... but is it your expectation that
NZTA will continue committing billions of dollars of
funding to big capital projects, and sometimes through a
PPP, which is going to lock in repayments over 20, 25 years
with that prior to this review and prioritization and-
Look, the system has to keep operating.
We're not stopping transport investment while we do a review.
The system's got to operate. You got to build the plane while you fly it a bit.
NZTA is going to keep operating, and the system settings for NZTA are what
they are at the moment through the GPS '24 through '27 period.
We're just going to start a review, and the scope of that is scope we've
indicated, but the who and when and how and all that stuff is
yet to be worked through.
So the kind of rationalization of what we're spending on transport won't
start until after the GPS 2024 to
2027?
Well, there's a new GPS coming.
Okay.
Okay, I think we've got that one. Tangi, you had a sup
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks, Minister.
I've just seen this today as well, this afternoon.
So you're confirming that the new assurance process will kick in from
the 1st of November?
Yes, we publicly announced that. That was announced in April.
Okay. But there's still an asterisk here around the defense side of things.
The plan itself identified transport as a particular
focus,
and the need for that. So can I just get some clarity? Basically, the RONs.
Yeah
Is the expectation that the RONs would be put through this
assurance process?
If they're Crown funded, yes.
Okay.
What about partially?
Probably, yes.
Probably, yes. Okay.
But is it like a-
Hang on. Sorry, are you finished, Tangi?
Sorry, just one further thing. In terms of your earlier comment around some of
those decisions are best taken by NZTA,
is that because you're relying on them,
not saying I agree with this or not, but you're relying on them to be best placed
to be making those decisions in the context of what's available?
Yeah. If
you read the commissions report, they go on to quite a lot of detail
around how this stuff works. So
if you go back in time,
in 2008, NZTA was created. We brought together Transfund,
Transit,
and the LTSA into a big beast called NZTA.
Now,
that was a decision Annette King made.
The view was having it all in one place was better.
That's what we've got.
The way in which land transport funding works is we set a government
policy statement, and the law
essentially says to ministers and the government of the day,
you can be quite didactic and directive around the funding categories, the
activity classes, and where the money goes.
That is quite a contrast from other network utility
industries like, say, electricity lines, for example, or electricity and
transmission investment, or
a range of other industries. Energy is another one.
Energy generation, more broadly.
But that's the system we have and the reality is that has
led to some challenges
over successive governments about the way in which we make transport investments.
So,
the NZTA board
applies
the GPS by law, and from the GPS
spawns a national land transport plan, which uses a national land transport
fund implement in accordance with government policy.
And government policy changes and has changed over
successive governments,
and partly the oscillation and change in government policy priorities
has led to a bit of whiplash
out there in local government land and in the sector.
And that's problematic, and you know that as well as I do.
So what I'm signaling and what the government is signaling in response to the
plan is that the status quo is not sustainable, right?
In which we have 50% of transport spending in this country as user
charges, and the rest of it is just taxpayers.
Because all of that Crown capital, all of that taxpayer capital
competes with schools and hospitals and defense
and courthouses and police stations and
everything else the government does.
And there's been a massive investment in transport.
The system is meant to be user
pays, and it isn't.
So I've been really upfront about that. I've been saying that for nine months.
You done on this one? Okay. Sup on this?
No.
No, because I do have a sup on this. So just, are you saying in
effect that the GPS is a model which we should be
changing? Because you're right-
We're doing a review.
Yeah. Well,
okay. That'll be pretty useful. Okay.
Simon. Julianne, you had a sup on that, too?
Yeah. I guess my sup was just about
the government has realized, thanks to the National Infrastructure Plan and the
work there, that we've been spending too much
money on large new capital projects.
But the government's saying that-
Respectfully, I've been giving speeches about this since October, so-
Yeah
... it doesn't take the plan to point that out to me.
Right.
But thank you.
Okay. Yeah. The plan and your work,
recognizing that. But it sounds like
until this process is in place, there's still
room for the government to commit the country to
probably more than $10 billion
of needing to repay
a PPP on one-
You worry about Northland
... specific project that's not going to go through-
... this investment assurance process.
Well, it's got to go through
all the various stages and gateways and meet the affordability threshold from this
month.
So there will be a invert-- like a-
We're committed to Northland. If you're asking about Northland, we're committed to
the first stage of what we've did to Tahara.
Okay. And so that's irrespective of
the concerns that have been signaled about how the country's
been spending money on infrastructure.
Wouldn't this be a good time to revisit that-
We're not intending to revisit
... if we want long-term-
We're not intending to revisit what we've-
If we want long-term cross-party consensus on-
Sure, but we're not-
... investing in the very best projects that are going to be-
Sure. I know that you don't like Northland, and we have a different view,
so.
Well, no, I'm not-- That's one thing to say-
Okay
... I don't like it. It's not been through the process that you're saying that
all big capital projects-
It's been-
... should be through.
Yeah. It's been through an NZTA investment case process.
And we know the-- And that is directed by the GPS,
which just lists a strategy of building this particular road-
Yeah,
but that's a bit demeaning to NZTA.
It's gone through quite a robust investment case process through NZTA.
Okay. I'll ask one more sup on this, and then I'm going to go to Simon, and then
I'm going to come back up to Kieran, then Callus.
So as we go through this assurance process If
the Infrastructure Commission Treasury say, "We actually don't think that this
particular project stacks up," what happens to that project?
Well, ultimately,
that will be on ministers to make a decision.
We're not
subcontracting investment decisions to an independent
agency,
through the commission.
For Crown capital funded projects, we're not doing that.
And just lift yourself up from transport for a moment, because I get everyone
forgets we're saying about-
I wasn't just focused on transport.
I was just across-
Yeah, okay, good. Because the new investment assurance process is
quite a shift,
because it will apply to hospitals, schools,
courthouses,
police stations. Anything that goes through the investment management system, well,
with some exceptions, the stuff that goes through the investment management system,
will be subject to that process. And,
ultimately,
it's cabinet that makes decisions either through budget
or through the ordinary run-of-the-mill events.
And,
again, I've talked publicly about this before, and I'll just repeat it.
The Minister of Finance and I in particular have been
extremely frustrated at
how poor the system is at leading to
good decision-making.
And,
frankly, some of the projects that are
late, delayed,
expensive...
I'm trying to make this in a way that's not too political.
Ministers should have rejected
and intervened far earlier than they
did in order to get the project back on track.
On the other hand,
to be nice to past governments,
ministers can only intervene when they have the right information.
So that's part of the system we're trying to change.
So if ministers are not told that a hospital, for
example, has gateway red flags all through it, and
that the project is a disaster,
it's a bit unfair for ministers to be expected to intervene if they don't know.
Okay? I
don't think Erica was before this committee, but she's been on the media this
morning on this IT project. Which I'm
not totally familiar with at all, but sounds just like an absolute
cluster of epic proportions,
and which basically ministers were misled.
And so that's sort of my point in an infrastructure context is if you don't have
the information, you can't
step in and do the proper
assurance role as ministers and actually withhold money and say, "You know what?
We're not going to keep throwing good money after bad." You need the information.
And so what we're trying to build through the system and through the assurance
changes is a proper
professional system so that people like me, who have to sit around
and discharge hundreds
of millions of dollars of public money, can actually say yes or
no, knowing that with some degree of confidence, that the money's going to
go to the right place and the project will actually be built.
That wasn't the situation three years ago when we first became government.
It's not the situation now, but we're getting there.
We're making improvements.
So these guys are the guys to give the red flags, and then it's up to the ministers
to take that red flag or not.
Yeah.
So the other question I've got there, final question from me, and then I'll go to
Simon, is just what does this mean in your view for political parties making
promises at election time in terms of saying, "I'm going to build this, I'm going
to build this, I'm going to build this." Or is it, "I'm going to look at doing
this, I'm going to look at doing this, I'm going to look at doing this.
Because I know, and I will get some advice about whether this is good, bad, or
indifferent." I don't know what it is.
This is not the time to talk about campaign stuff.
Oh, yeah, no, I just thought it was useful.
Well, I'll just
make this point.
We all need to be better at
not promising things we don't
really know much about.
Both
sides of politics have been guilty of that. Because it's easy, right?
To turn up and say, "We're going to build X and Y."
Next question, how much? Oh, I don't know.
Next question, when? Oh, I don't know.
Next question,
when will it finish? Oh, I don't know.
So-
It's useful
... we've all got to be better. We've got to be better.
Good. I like that. Simon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, we've heard plenty of concerns coming
from the engineering community, contractors about gold
plating, green plating-
Yeah
... scope creep in major infrastructure projects.
Yeah.
So, it costs blow out and where practical alternatives never get considered.
So I'm interested in what work is underway to ensure that business cases test those
simpler-
Yeah
... low cost and standardized options before moving to a bespoke or a
higher spec alternative. Question.
Yeah.
So it's a good question. We've placed a real emphasis on that,
and frankly, I think we can go further.
Roading, for example, is an area that really
makes me anxious.
Just how much stuff costs,
and
the reality is we are not a wealthy enough country to afford
some of the
things we want to build, and we need to look at
value for money. We've made some really good progress on school
property, which is not really within the scope of the estimates, but it's an
example of what you're talking about, in which we've gone for much more
standardized modular designs.
Erica would be able to give you the numbers, but I think the average cost of a
classroom's gone from about 1.2 to 650. Varies a bit, it's an average.
It's been in the media a bit this week. It is an average.
But there's more we can do on
health in that regard. Samian would be the first to say that.
I don't know if you saw the most recent police station at Taradale.
It's just opened.
That was done through a modular off-site build,
and then
sent up the road. It was done in the Hutt, actually.
Sent up the road to Taradale. It was delivered on time, under budget.
It's a modular, standardized design. I think there's more we can do there.
I'll give you one example,
courthouses.
Yep, they've got some specialty requirements, but they're
just courthouses.
We try and reinvent the wheel too much and be bespoke about these things.
We've just got to get towards...
There's a spectrum, but we've got to move towards much more standardization
in looking at value for money solutions. We've got a long way to go.
We've made some progress, but there's more to do.
Cool. One more. Yeah.
Yeah. We've also seen some Crown infrastructure projects struggle with delivery
capability.
Yeah.
I think you mentioned hospitals, procurement discipline,
scope control, of course, and managing cost escalation.
So I'm interested, how does the minister see the role for Crown infrastructure
delivery-
Yeah
... in lifting value for money for-
Well, I've got John O'Hagan here. So just brief context,
and I'll hand over to John.
What we did in '24 was we reorganized the system a bit.
So the commission's now in charge of strategy.
Treasury's in charge of policy and obviously the fiscal settings.
And NFCO's in charge of the private finance stuff, Graham's here,
and all of the other things that they do, which is large.
And we've got John here from CID. It's the old Ōtakaro.
It's the old
Roepaeinga.
That's okay.
Ōtakaro, then Roepaeinga, then CID. Righty-o.
So that's like the Crown specialty infrastructure delivery entity.
And so I might ask John to talk about some of their successes.
We're making real progress.
Yes. So the committee's touched on a couple of things, and you've touched on
modular design and construction.
So,
Crown infrastructure delivery,
we see ourselves not only in the delivery space, but also in the project advisory
space as well. And, as you'll be aware, there's some mandated agencies
that are mandated to use us, and those agencies
are ones that don't typically deliver infrastructure projects.
So instead of them standing up their own delivery entity or
personnel within their own organization, they use us
for that.
So our role is very much around value for money, value engineering,
value management, modular construction.
So we
actually did the short-term enroll growth program with the Ministry of Health for
the Auckland projects last year. So that-
Education.
Sorry, education. Sorry. So the ones that the minister referred to,
we actually did a lot of work there to get that $1.3 million down to
$650,000.
And we're currently working with Health NZ, doing their interim
inpatient units across five hospitals across the country.
So again, modular construction.
We have
got
a
contractor working out of Auckland, and they're fabricating their
complete units to put on the back of the truck.
And, Hawksbay has been a great success there, where we've just
landed effectively the whole unit over the course of a couple of weeks,
and we're now just into commissioning and finalizing it.
So we're
embedding ourselves into projects to get value for money, cost
savings,
and we're looking at courts. Courts of Ministry of Justice are another
agency that we work with. Doing a great job with
Auckland District Court, where we have saved the
ministry a lot of money there.
Very expensive courts.
And we're currently working with the ministry on the virtual
court.
Great. Excellent. Thank you very much.
Kieran.
Thank you.
You said yourself that reasonable people can disagree on the LNG terminal,
and in the government's response, you're talking
about how important it is that ministers did make informed decisions.
Yeah.
Would you hold off the LNG terminal so that it can go through the
infrastructure's assurance processes?
Well, I'm not responsible for the LNG terminal.
It's an issue for Simeon. I can tell you that Cabinet
set up a pretty rigorous
process around it.
And we've got NFCO
leading
on... Well, NFCO's involved. Graham might want to talk about his
shop's involvement there.
Simeon's leading on that, but
we're running a pretty rigorous process around
it.
If the timing was different, though, this is the sort of project that would go
through that process, would it not?
I'm not sure it would,
because we're not
going to own the LNG terminal.
So it's only infrastructure that, I speak to the Crown owns-
It's going through-
... that would go through that insurance process
... it's going through a business case process, but it's not...
Yeah, so it's an interesting one, isn't it?
I
don't know if it ordinarily would.
It
doesn't go through the investment management system in the ordinary way.
Given the level of expenditure that is required and the relative
controversy that surrounds this proposal-
Yeah
... is that not a potential gap in this process, that such a
piece of infrastructure wouldn't necessarily go through the process
that other-
Mm
... Crown pieces of infrastructure are?
But don't you want ministers to make informed decisions across the board?
Yeah, but I
can tell you we are going to make an informed decision.
We're running it through a proper process.
There's a procurement underway. There's business casing underway.
There's- I mean, we are
doing it in a rigorous way. I don't know, Graham, do you want to talk about...
Well, he's probably commercial confident. I don't know. Maybe not.
But can I just jump in with the-
Kieran, have you finished?
Just to... This is literally the one project that we,
as a party, haven't been able to-
Yeah
... say, "Yes, we will see this through," amendments, because there's still
unanswered questions. The Commission's plan expressed
reservations about it.
If the cabinet is of the view that this is the right way to
go about it, surely in the spirit of trying to get
bipartisanship and make proper decisions-
Yeah
... this is the sort of thing that would want to go through that process.
Well, we are running it through a proper process.
The commission hasn't been asked to do...
The commission's done some work on energy, but they haven't been asked to do
proper analysis. Well, they've been asked to do a sort of IPP
reassurance process, but there are processes around
it.
We are confident
in the problem
around dry year risk in '28, and-
It's not out of scope
... there are any number of difficult-
I don't think it is
... decisions that flow from that.
No trans. That's not us. Ask Australia.
But I-
Oh, I'm being told it's going to gateway next week, so there is a gateway-
But-
... assurance process underway as part of that.
Okay.
But the gateway assurance-
Yeah
... and the investor assurance generally is about once
you've decided-
Yeah
... what the solution and the specific project is.
Yes.
And I guess I thought that
the issues raised in the national infrastructure plan were more about
identifying, having the right problem definition,
and looking at different options that might be more cost effective.
So-
Yeah
... the issue here isn't whether we've decided to build this one
stretch of highway or this LNG terminal, and we're going to try and get it done
without cost overruns and without budget blowouts and value for money.
But that's a different question to, is this the right thing to be spending
billions of dollars on-
Yeah
... to get the outcomes we want? And I guess,
where is the government
applying that level of thinking to some of these really
expensive projects that it's planning to sign us up to?
In relation to the LNG, you obviously disagree, and you're very entitled
to do that. And as I say, reasonable people can disagree about this.
It's a very nutty public policy problem to solve.
There's extensive analysis out there around how an LNG
terminal to get through the dry year risk issue that
presents
relatively soon from '28 onwards is the right thing to do.
There's analysis that's not. But welcome to
the energy sector.
This government's taken a position and done
extensive amount of work on it, and that's our view.
Sup on that?
One quick sup and then Carlos.
Minister, would it be fair to say that,
when coming into government, that building an LNG terminal wasn't on
your
list of things you knew you had to do?
Well, I'm not sure anyone thought that.
I've been around energy for a while,
in some way, shape, or form. I think,
even without being too political about it, we are bearing the
cost of decisions made in 2018, 2019, that were
not made with any analysis whatsoever.
And, those are the costs that the country is now bearing, and we're the ones having
to sort it out.
Carlos.
Thank you. Minister, you mentioned on today's report talking about the
assets management work program, which is one of the most substantial reform
of public sector assets management in recent decade.
Can you give us a little bit more detail what kind of reform is this
undergoing?
Yeah. So asset management's one of these things where
people regard it as boring, but,
unless you don't do it properly-
Would say
... eventually you will pay for it.
So as I say, we're going to legislate for long-term investment and asset management
plans. Legislation will follow next
year.
We've got an asset management
action plan
which is underway. We're
in phase one. I don't know, Jeff might want to talk about some of the guidance that
you've issued,
from a commission point of view, which is quite important.
Yeah. The motivation for this is that, when we look
forward of all of the demands that we're going to have over the next 30 years, many
of them are renewals. It's about looking after existing assets that we already
have and making sure that they are able to get through a
renewal cycle.
So when we look around and asked across all of the different sectors in New
Zealand, I'm thinking about local government, regulated utilities, central
government. Central government stood out for not having the
requirements that the other sectors did have.
And so you'll recall that we kind of made a point that we don't always have
asset management plans in place. We don't always have critical asset
registers in place. Where we do, we see
maintenance to depreciation rates that are quite low.
We pointed this out in land transport, and so that really
motivate this work program, I think, of trying to
lift the competence, and focus on this area within the
central government portfolio. So,
the government response talks about having
requirements that would first be in cabinet circular for asset management
plans and then subsequently legislating for those, which is actually
similar to what we would see in other sectors.
So I see this as a program that's actually bringing us up to what we
require as understood.
It's pretty
depressing. Central government makes local government have all these long-term
capital plans and asset management plans.
And we make
regulated network utilities like lines, companies, and airports do the same thing.
And we do not impose that on ourselves.
And unsurprisingly, we do a shoddy job of looking after what we've got.
And there's some central government agencies barely know what they own.
They don't have asset registers. They barely know what they are, let alone the
state of what's in them. If you think water in Wellington's bad, wait until you see
some central government agencies.
So,
we're going to fix that. It's not going to happen immediately, though.
It's going to take some time.
Yes, I think similar to what you guys mentioned just now, I think the report also
highlights that data of maintenance and renewal spending is often
incomplete. How can we actually address this to get better
data so we can better understand this?
Well, this is what we're going to do.
So the first step is, if you're a government agency at the
moment, you are required by the Cabinet Office Circular
23/9
to have a register, and you're meant to send in...
It's every year, isn't it?
In fact, it's coming up soon. Chief executives are meant to write the Treasury a
letter and say, "We know what we own." And,
the chief executive's got to sign, got to attest to that.
Well, that's all good.
But what happens to that information? Well, nothing.
So they just write a letter saying, "We've got an asset register." Well, who's
doing the checking as to whether or not the register is complete,
accurate, and who's doing the checking as to making sure that
the investment that flows from the state of the assets is going in the
right place? No one. Not anyone, really.
So that's what we're changing.
Okay? So this is what I mean about getting the underlying
system settings right, and this is not actually political, this is
the architecture of the
infrastructure system that no one's been interested in for
20 years. So we're fixing it, and the country will be better off if we
can get
it done.
Thank you.
We are at time, but have you got time for any other questions?
I can take one or two more, yeah.
Can I just throw one in at you?
Yeah.
Because that's why I asked. And that's the relationship between asset
management
and we've also got in the local government sector, Jeff, you mentioned local
government sector, the idea of capping rates.
And I know that if there's anything that concerns local government on that
capping, it's not the fripperies,
it's the asset management. How are those two going to be squared up?
Well,
I think relatively easily. Looking after what you've got is a core part of
what you've got to do,
at a local government level.
There's a whole lot of stuff happening inside local government.
We're going to strip a lot of the cost out of local government through the RMA
reform. Really confident about that, particularly the digital back end, which
has got zero attention. But, we're investing considerably,
including through this budget, in building a digital e-plan for local
government. That, plus the changes through the actual law,
through RMA reform,
planning reform, will strip a lot of the cost out.
But at the same time, we're also giving them
greater ability to cost recover for growth infrastructure through development of
development levies and Infrastructure Funding and Financing Act changes are on top
of that. And of course, you've got the housing incentives.
So there's a lot happening in that space.
I think it's wrong to look at it through a binary, you've got this and you've got
that. You've got to look at it in the round.
I'll leave it there. More things to talk about later.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. We really appreciate it.
Thank you.
And then we'll switch to the officials.
We can shut the door there as well. We much appreciate it.
Thank you.
Okay.
Look, I think
we know most of you, but it'd probably be quite good to have the quick flick around
everybody, at least who's at the table, so
those members who are not familiar with everybody, will know who everybody is and
where everybody's from. And then do you want to go straight to questions across the
board for-
Yeah
... and we'll just take it as whichever.
We'll try and theme them up a little bit, whichever, because we've got you all
together for an extended period. Or do you want to say anything to start?
I don't need to say anything, but I was just wondering whether Pam, being new,
might want to say a few words.
If you've got a couple of minutes, I can-
Well, we can do the intros first, and then if anybody wants to say anything, so-
Okay
... that's fine. Okay, away you go. Let's do the intros anyway.
Kia ora folks, I'm Pamela Bell. I'm Chair of Crown Infrastructure Delivery.
Thank you, Pamela.
I'm John O'Hagan, I'm the Chief Executive of Crown Infrastructure Delivery.
And Jeff Cooper. I think I know who you are.
Yes.
Hi, Jeff.
Raveen Jeevanandam, Chair.
Chris Bunnell from Treasury.
Mark Adams, GM of Infrastructure Funding and Finance.
Graham Mitchell, the CEO of the same.
Thank you. Right. Pamela, you want to say a few words to kick us
off?
Yes, here we go.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm Professor Pamela Bell.
I'm Chair of Crown Infrastructure Delivery, as you've just heard.
And I'm joined here today by our Chief Executive, John O'Hagan, and
our General Manager, Richard O'Reilly back there.
Look, I joined the board fairly recently and became chair in March, so this is my
first appearance before you. I've been getting to know the history of the
organization, the great legacy it holds in delivering Crown projects to
rebuild Christchurch after the Canterbury earthquakes, the trust and
capability that it's grown, and the wealth of experienced, skilled people
that work to add value as the Crown's delivery agent.
And I think we all heard Minister Bishop say that it's quality people that
make the system, so that's pretty apt in that case.
At CID, we partner and build capability with public sector organizations, if
you've heard. We get important infrastructure built and managed to
excellent standards. That looks like delivering incredibly complex
projects, providing advisory services, developing business cases,
growing capability through embedded support, and a range of asset
management and renewal services CID is evolving and
growing from its original focus, regenerating Christchurch, from
back in the Sierra days, to a broader role now across the country, and
from a fully funded model towards a fee for service model.
So this transition means we're actively broadening our services across the
infrastructure life cycle from the early stage planning through to asset management
and end of life divestment. This past year, you might know that we reached a
major milestone with the delivery of Parekura, the recreation and sports center.
Over 30,000 square meters of facilities from everyone from
grassroots participation to high performance athletics,
so that more Kiwis can get to the Olympics, which is something I was lucky to do in
1998, if you can remember last century.
This project-
Well done.
... effectively closes out the Crown Lead Canterbury Inc.
project program and marks a decade of hard work on complex
projects and challenging situations, which is something that CID
excels at. CID continues to apply innovative approaches,
modern methods of construction, as we've been talking about today, and proven
lessons across work programs. We've already talked about the off-site
manufactured classrooms that have been delivered for the Ministry of Education, and
that recent application to that technique to Health NZ's interim
inpatient units program, which are currently delivering 140
extra beds as we speak.
Prefabricated or off-site manufacturing approaches are becoming more important
as we look for faster, more adaptable, more dependable, and less
disruptive ways to deliver infrastructure into live
project settings. I literally wrote a book on it called "Kiwi
Prefab: From Cottage to Cutting Edge" back in 2012.
It was a while ago, but we're still quite keen on the topic.
CID is well-placed and experienced to continue delivering better outcomes,
which is very critical, as I said, in those live environments.
A couple of those environments include Auckland District Court and Wellington Girls
College, which is local here. Other projects that are local are
the Kenepuru Science Center, and in Auckland, the Plant Health and
Environment Capability facility, which we
colloquially call PHEC.
So CID is also well-placed to help agencies as the public sector puts more
emphasis on looking after existing assets. That's what we're talking about today.
And we have practical experience in ownership and asset management with Te Pai,
Christchurch's convention center, and have managed Crown-owned land
divestment as part of the regeneration program.
In the current environment, as we've been talking about with the minister, we've
got a stronger focus on maintenance, asset renewals, asset condition,
and sweating those assets. Getting more value out of what is
already owned. So that's an area that we can support agencies with as
well. You've heard about the work that we've been doing on
the ground as projects, but we also do embedded
expertise. So we have secondments into Oranga
Tamariki and Health NZ. We assist with early
planning for agencies such as NZ Police and MSD,
and we also work with local government, most recently
Whanganui District Council.
So we are broadening our service provision. We're going out around the nation.
We are shifting towards our fee for service operation.
So it's challenging, as you know, in the current climate where public sector
investment is constrained, but that's our direction of travel, while we
balance quality, agility, and delivering value.
So we are your Crown-owned company, and we're focused on best for
government, best for project, best for NZ outcomes.
So as you've heard, that's proven delivery, trusted expertise,
and growing public sector capability.
Thanks for the time to introduce that.
Pamela, thank you.
Happy to take a question.
Thank you.
Anybody else wanted to say any introductory remarks? Because otherwise we'll go.
Right. Have we done... No. Right. Okay. We'll go straight to questions.
I had a first primary over here and then over there. Dan.
I'm going to go to you, mate.
Okay. You want to go. Okay. Away you go.
Appreciate that.
Go on.
Thank you very much for appearing today.
Without meaning any disrespect to the other agencies, my particular focus today is
the commission.
Given that
we haven't seen you since the report's been finalized and now today with the
government's response,
with a particular focus around the assurance process that was
signaled by the government earlier this year.
Jeff, you'll know that this has been an area of interest for us for a while.
We talked about it at length last time you were here.
So I'm particularly interested in how this will roll out.
We note that in the
financials, that a well-signaled deficit, planned deficit
over the next couple of years, but you've been given this additional resource.
So my first question is,
as the responsibility transfers from Treasury, will there be resource to follow
that?
Yep. Yes, there will. So Gateway,
essentially comes with, it's the SRO that pays for it, the senior responsible,
the agency, and it comes with a revenue stream of 75,000
per review.
That should help
you get a sense of scope of the gateways, as they
currently exist. Of course, there's five gateways, but there's a gateway zero
as well. So there's six numbers at different points in the
process.
Currently, Gateway has a model whereby
it is experts coming in and asking questions of the project team.
We are looking at creating more of a mixed model with an in-house component
to that to build up internal capability.
So there's a few things that we're thinking about in terms of, I suppose,
integrating with what we've been doing in the IPP space.
But yep, it's constrained by the amount of revenue that there is.
Yep
You mentioned earlier,
when I was thinking earlier, sorry, when the minister was here around, I think you
used the term projects that qualify.
Yes.
The signal that Treasury is going to be
seeing the policy,
and so is that what you mean by qualify?
Yes. So the policy will establish qualification
for this. I will give a précis and then
Chris might want to
add to that, keeping in mind that this has not been locked down.
Yeah.
But-
I appreciate it
... yeah, as a sort of general high risk, high profile, high cost
projects are required to go through Gateway.
Then there's sort of a stagger down where you have,
not required at the bottom end of that.
So you don't want-
Small
... low cost, low risk projects having to go through an arduous process.
Yeah.
It's filtered out. And in the middle you have projects that have an
option to participate.
Yeah.
If there's anything you want to add to that. But yeah.
So you can expect to see something similar.
Option to participate, does that then come with a requirement to
provide funding
with it?
Yes, it would. A lot of projects
choose to participate-
Mm
... because they're using this as a way to get independent advice
on their projects.
I would sort of make a distinction that might be useful.
I would think of the historic gateway a little bit like
your sort of school mentor, right?
It's a process whereby it's coming in to help you figure out good
ways forward. The IPP is a little bit more
like your high school professor. It's saying what we would expect to
see. The direction is that sort of new
gateway, actually, we have a name for it now, the investor
assurance,
will be a combination of these, where we will be trying to
direct feedback back to the SRO. But also
as mentioned by Minister Bishop, there is a desire for this to point
more towards ministers as well.
This one's probably more for Chris.
When I asked about the LNG terminal as an example, the minister's initial
response was because the Crown won't own it.
Is that likely to be a steer to what would therefore
determine which projects qualify for this process, and why
would that be a determining factor?
So that one is effectively going through the process.
It is going through the gateway as is, and it's also going through the business
case process.
There's other elements, though, because it's not intended to be Crown-owned, that
it wouldn't necessarily pick up all aspects.
But certainly gateway business case, it's going through those
investor assurance processes.
Okay. Thank you.
Other supps on this. So it's Simon and then Julianne.
Simon.
Yeah.
Oh, thanks.
Thank you.
Thanks, Dave.
Yeah.
So,
just thinking about the business case process.
I asked the minister a question during his time
about, is the business case process fit for
purpose to identify the risk of gold plating, green
plating, scope creep, whether all practical low cost
alternatives have been devised or is it simply a
way of approving a preferred option
without actually testing all of those matters? And does it need to be improved?
I think you'd get a reaction from almost everybody around this table as to how
they've sort of seen the business casing process used.
I've certainly heard it be described as a
box ticking exercise-
Mm
... a bureaucratic exercise.
We have, through the IPP program, which
I realize is not necessarily the business case program, but
assessed sort of 130, 140 different
projects. Some of those have been at a stage
two, which is at the stage where you would expect to see optioneering.
And
one of the sort of characterizations that I would say of projects coming through
that is that oftentimes what we see is that
options are, that the weighting given to
cost is often very low.
So typically, if you were using a cost benefit ratio, you would use a
ratio of 50% for cost, right?
It is not uncommon to see projects coming through that process with a
weighting of 10, 20%, right? So the
analogy that I have offered in the past is that if you sort of walk into a car
yard and you
give a weighting of 20% to cost, you're going to walk
out of there with a pretty flash car.
And so that's what we see a lot of in the business casing
process, is a lot of very high cost interventions.
And the rule that we run in order to give confidence to decision makers
on is, are we seeing those low cost options even make it
through into the business casing process?
So,
I don't, yeah.
Yeah. I think another point just to
make clear, both better business cases and gateway are internationally regarded
processes. So this isn't anything that New Zealand invented of
ourselves. I think to follow Jeff's car analogy, though, the
car's only as good as how you drive it.
So the business cases typically cover the right ground.
But if you look at some of the business cases, they extend to several hundred pages
worth of material, and we're serving that in front of ministers
in a cabinet meeting with limited amount of time to traverse all of that
material.
What often gets summarized and put through might not necessarily give the meat that
is needed to make an informed decision.
So part of the investor assurance changes, we're actually putting a bit more heat
on officials to furnish- ... ministers with that
pertinent information to make an informed decision.
So,
perhaps sometimes cost isn't given sufficient weighting.
Sometimes the actual recommended or the most
worthy option within a business case might not necessarily be the one that makes
its way to the table for decision-making.
So we're being asked to more explicitly
make that completely transparent to ministers when we're making that call.
Okay. Further to that, so is Treasury still responsible for business case and
gateway policy?
Yes.
So have you got any work underway to make sure that these lower-cost
options are flushed out?
So we're doing a couple of things. One, with the commission, we're working
on harmonizing gateway and the IPP
process to get the best of both worlds.
So that's under active consideration at the moment.
The other big change that we are making is the fitness
assessment product. So to inform or to
assist ministers make an informed choice around Cabinet table,
there's a wealth of information. It's the things that can be extracted from the
business case. It's compliance with Cabinet Office
circulars and expectations and certainly I expect to ground quite a
bit on this as to whether or not agencies are properly exploring private
finance and funding options at the right point.
It's Treasury instructions. It's basic legislation.
All of those things we're intending to bring together into a single product
to put in front of ministers to assist them to make that decision.
Helpful. Thanks.
Julian, sup.
So,
if the LNG terminal is going through this gateway process,
is it a possibility that Cabinet would be presented
with options that included not doing
it at this point, or is that off the table now?
No. So core Treasury, that is the expectation of the agency to
provide the free and frank advice on all spending decisions.
So at the point that Cabinet is making that call, we'd certainly be putting our
advice forward as to-
And would more breadth to Te Hana,
which is a highway project that
is looking at a PPP
financing arrangement.
Is that going to go through a gateway process?
I'm not sure
that's PPP.
That's National-
It'll be under the National Land Transport Fund.
So no, it'll be going through their legislative process.
Right. So that's totally not subject to independent
assessment.
Not through the mechanisms that we-
Even though it's going through a PPP,
that Treasury has no interest in.
Treasury has PPP policy.
So the overarching policy we helped shape, and
government adopted it.
The individual transaction, though, because of the nature of that one and the
relationship with the National Land Transport Fund, it's through the
Land Transport Act and the provisions there.
So taking your last sup, and then I'll go to Dan.
I've taken your comments about business cases. Are you...
Because obviously a vast bulk of projects are not going to get to the stage of
being big enough, complicated enough, et cetera, for them to get the
assurance process.
The business case
process though, are you again thinking about providing any advice
or guidance about sort of weightings in that?
Because if cost gets to be 10 or 20% weighting,
that seems to me to be just, they clearly have got to be wrong,
if somebody's doing that.
So are you looking to provide some sort of guidance, not just for
central government, but for
local government and other agencies as well?
The guidance exists.
Yeah.
Our
Treasury's guidance on business casing is good.
The question is whether or not we're actively using that in the business cases.
And I think what I would signal here is that in the future from November 1,
through the process that we're establishing here, that's what we're doing with the
IPP. I expect we'll be doing something similar with
this new function as well, to provide confidence that the
guidance issued by Treasury in the business cases is being actioned in the business
cases themselves.
So that would at least highlight that so people who are thinking about making
decisions will be able to look at,
be able to ask questions about weighting and why you ended up where you end up with
and
whether that was a good decision or bad decision as a result of that.
That's exactly right.
Yeah. We would be doing that. So we would be giving that feedback
because,
in a way, we're closing the loop.
I think even if there's projects you're not seeing, but it is just providing
guidance to the overall sector, that would be a good thing. Dan.
Sorry, just on that, one other thing.
There is an intention to look across all of the learnings from
the projects and, as we've done with the IPP, sort of be able to
express things that we're seeing across business cases as well.
That sort of speaks to that point.
And just recently in March,
we re-released guidance to make it more clear and more accessible.
So the proof will be in the pudding as to how it reveals these things.
Yeah.
But we are trying to make it
more fit for purpose.
Excellent. Thank you. Dan.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. This may be a question for Mark and Graham, but
others may wish to comment as well.
Where are we at with getting more private capital into infrastructure
projects? So,
talking to heads of major investment banks in New Zealand, seems to me
there's
major feedback from them is
there's a lot of private capital that wants to invest, but we need to serve them up
the right type of projects, and they're not kind of necessarily seeing
those projects being served up. I know Invest New Zealand is
supposed to be filling that gap. But I'm just wondering if you guys have
any observations on where we're at with
trying to get more private capital
foreign capital in particular into some of our investment projects.
I see 12,000 odd pipeline.
We can fund only a small fraction of that.
I think the gap is in foreign capital.
So,
what's the blockage here?
Maybe Graham can comment on the specifics in New Zealand .
But there's no issue in terms of capital.
Mm.
There's a lot of capital available for projects.
The issue for New Zealand is a flow of decent-sized
projects. That's really the issue.
Mm.
Because you need continuity to keep people in town.
Graham, do you want to comment on some of the things that are going on?
Well, I think you'll know that the government's late announcements at the
infrastructure summit earlier this year on looking at toll concessions.
Mm.
We're one of the few
OECD countries that don't use toll concessions to fund capital transport
projects or fair box concessions, either one,
which is quite unique. I think Sweden's the only other one because they've got a
treaty. Luxembourg's saying that they won't do that for some strange reason.
So there is lots of appetite and investor interest around that sort of
stuff there. It's working with...
We're still going through that process at a government level.
The same sort of thing in health. In health at the moment, we do actually use
forms of private capital. For example, probably gone and had a blood test.
It's all provided by the private sector, but paid for by the government.
So we're looking at how we can use that to expand labs and
pathology work inside health and things like that to get better services
for patients, and that's quite common, not only in New Zealand but
internationally. So there's things like that, using
development agreements to sort of get these sorts of Crown buildings built
by professional developers who can actually put other things into the building.
So we share the cost across a public tenant and a private tenant to
reduce the burden on the taxpayer.
We've done that sort of random situations.
We're trying to get that more formulated.
For example, the government does not invest in office buildings anymore other than
the one next door. But apart from that, the defense building's
obviously by the Defense Department Ministry.
So, those sorts of things, trying to focus on that.
Correct.
We can actually do that because that frees up the government's fiscal
resources, so it can use it on things that you
can't actually get otherwise funded.
Correct.
And things like that. And we're also using the Infrastructure Funding and Financing
Act, which I think this committee has considered. Was it?
It's actually, I think-
Yep
... EFC.
Your committee.
Yes. Yeah.
Which actually does help things well in transport funding,
water in particular and flood protection and things like
that.
So you're happy-
We need private capital in there to help fund those through using property-based-
Mm
... land value changes.
So we've given you the tools, the capabilities there in terms of in
your organization.
As Mark mentioned, it's getting that pipeline-
Yeah
... development coming forward.
Great.
Can I maybe just make one comment on that?
Yeah.
I think it is useful to think of the binding constraint as being a funding one, not
a financing one, right?
Mm-hmm.
And,
so when you think about the fiscal situation that central government finds
itself in, when you think of the fiscal situation that local
government finds itself in, there is a squeeze going on with
consolidated revenues to fund capital investment in this country.
Now, on the other hand, you have got New Zealand that spends lots on
capital investment, and we've sort of tried to make this point through the plan and
other documents that New Zealand is there or thereabouts,
up in the top 10% in the world for how much we're spending on capital
investment.
So we're looking at a whole bunch of investments that don't have enough people
using it to justify the funding so that you can get the financing in place
for it.
And if you look around the country, a lot of projects
are really struggling to get through renewal cycles or are struggling
to run
positive cash flows on the assets that they already have.
In other words,
holding assets is very expensive and is taking a bite out of the consolidated
revenue. So one part of this is
actually about stepping back and going, "When is the right time to
invest in the project such that we know we've got a
high-quality investment with the right number of funders that could use it?"
Mm.
And the truth is that for a small, elongated country with very high,
costly geotechnical issues and so on and so forth,
sometimes as uncomfortable as it is for the electorate and so
on, waiting for that demand to be sufficient such that when you've
got the asset in place, you've got the funders around it.
That's what it requires, and I think we've tried to pull out that tension for many
of the sectors in the NIP.
Quick question, Jeff, if I can.
Yeah.
As out of the
pipeline, what proportion of projects are
of that kind of economic scale of being able to be,
having the toll
revenue that's large enough, do you-
Yeah.
I guess it slowly goes.
No road in New Zealand will produce enough volume to pay
for the total-
Yeah
... capital cost of building it. Now I'm going to get close.
It's probably about half.
Half across. Yeah.
I would probably go further-
Yeah
... and say that for a lot of projects,
the concessions are not enough to pay for the interest on the debt of the loan.
Yeah.
Which means that
as you go through a renewal cycle, if you're just looking at this from a
project finance point of view, you could be in a situation where you get
to a renewal cycle,
and you still have the debt from the original capital cost.
Mm.
That is a
difficult world to hand over to your kids.
Mm.
Because you're handing them a renewal problem and the debt from the
existing capital investment. And that is the position that a number of
our projects find themselves in.
Great. Thank you
Can I just ask-
Yes
... yeah, some steps on that. So, I know there's been a really big
emphasis on certainty of pipeline and carrying
on with projects that have been talked about.
But
is that more or less important than ensuring that we can
actually pay for the projects that we're signing up for
in the future?
I think that that is the right question to be asking, right?
You can put a whole bunch of certainty down
for the sector, but if you wander too far in
one direction, you're going to end up with a whole bunch of assets and financial
pain at the end of it as well. And I've been to asset
owners and talked to them about these assets, and there are no
shortage of them around.
And that financial pain is a heavy weight as well.
So there is
a sort of balance that needs to be struck here.
There are things we can do, no doubt, to improve certainty
for the pipeline, and we have offered some suggestions on that in terms
of putting maintenance first. You should be able to get a pretty highly
certain maintenance program for many of our assets.
But when we're looking at new capital builds, these are decisions that
because the CapEx turns into ongoing OpEx, which never goes
away, they're not decisions to wander into lightly, because we have to hand
those decisions over to future generations, so.
And in the
graph, I think that came out with the National Infrastructure
Plan top 10 agencies investment forecast for the next 10
years. NZTA's intentions
far, far outstrip any other agency
or government ministry. So,
not to overemphasize transport, but the
spending intentions on transport are far greater than anywhere else.
It sounds like from what you've said, Mark and Jeff, that
there's not going to be the ability to pay back
foreign capital if we attract it for these projects from tolls.
Do this entirely.
Or even the interest potentially on the-
Might be able to take the whole amount to get it called projects.
True.
Yeah.
PPP.
So yeah.
Do you have confidence? The government, in their
response today, said that they support the recommendations
from the National Infrastructure Plan, particularly around
oversight of land transport, sequencing, and prioritization, and
then the specific recommendations you've made about prioritizing funding
to asset maintenance and renewals.
But then in their response, they've said,
well, NZTA is going to decide about new capital projects based on the
GPS. And the current GPS, 2024 to 2027,
does not allocate as much to maintenance and
renewals as new capital projects in
highways, new state highways. So, I
guess,
how do we ensure that government is taking on
board the recommendation around prioritizing maintenance and renewals?
Can the-
I think it's a complete package. So our recommendations, and
we're glad that most of them
have been accepted. So asset management, for example,
was crucial. So if you do not improve asset management,
then building new things in preference to renewing and looking
after what you've always got
is going to create a bigger problem. So we need good asset management.
So, and we're getting that. In addition to that,
NZTA will only be able to spend within its
budget.
So if renewals take up 60% of their
budget, then they only have 40% to spend on new things.
If renewals take up 80% of their budget, then they only
have 20%.
So the answer to your question is we should look at
the
recommendations that we made in its entirety.
We need all those tools to change the
behaviors that we've got.
But I guess if NZTA is signing up for
another PPP,
which means that that's 20, 25 years of
repayments,
then they've pre-committed
repaying the debt on the new capital investment, not the
asset management and renewals. So it's the opposite.
They're
not going to have the money for the maintenance and renewals in the future because
they've signed us up for-
True. It comes back to the governance. There's a board.
The minister was clear that there's an expectation of the board
to do its job. So the board would be
doing that
in full knowledge as to what the impact would be.
One of the things about PPPs is that they bake in the
maintenance costs.
Right.
And-
Only for that project, though.
Yeah.
There's still the whole rest of the network.
Quite right.
That has been sort of purported to be a good thing about PPPs.
But it is in many ways a very expensive way to solve a
maintenance problem.
Sure.
We would hope that you wouldn't have to use a PPP just to get good maintenance
practices. So there's something much more broad here.
A couple of other points. I think my read of the response
to Rec 2 and the plan is a good one. I think that
there is an acknowledgment here of a longstanding problem
around investment levels, willingness to pay, and for what investment
program.
And so to my mind, that is a step forward in
accepting
that this is not something that's scalable.
The other point I would make here is, and we made this
in the plan and in
previous reports to the plan,
making this point around the funding model of the NLTF and the fact
that when you have more Crown contributions going into
that, it really muddies the waters of governance
for
the asset that you're investing in.
And that creates a whole bunch of downstream problems, of
which many of those have been canvassed here.
Like, is this project going to go through your process? Isn't it?
These are issues of governance, which are muddied because of the Crown
contributions issue.
So,
the work on REC Two, I think will be really quite
important for addressing actually all of these downstream
issues. Yeah.
Thank you.
Okay.
Thanks.
No worry.
This question for John,
and particularly. We've heard a lot of concerns about
poor project definition and scope creep, weak cost
control, inconsistent program management across Crown
infrastructure delivery. So from CRD's perspective, how much
of this delivery problem
could be pinned back to a program and project management
capability problem?
Look, I think a lot of it could be, particularly in the
agencies that have that low capability.
And again, when you look back at what the minister and what the government did in
the systems reforms of a couple of years ago with having
us involved in
infrastructure projects for those agencies was to re-act some of those
disciplines to improve
reporting, scope definition, management,
and
good project controls and program controls that can then feed up
through governance for decision making.
So that, the minister highlighted a couple of blindsided things that have
happened.
The stuff that we do on our projects is that
we manage the project controls really
well, risk, contingency, scope, and
schedule so that the
governance
levels aren't surprised of where the project's tracking.
Yeah. I would just add to that, that building leadership capability is one of the
items identified in the National Infrastructure Plan, and there's obviously good
work happening inside. InfoCom, you've got some great work being led in
there. So anything, we're obviously embedding people.
Mm-hmm.
But I think more of a system-wide upskilling of
leadership, of PH, of
project leaders inside agencies.
That's the core area to emphasize.
Just so if I can just add to the embedded services.
Yeah.
So, I think, as you know, we've spoken about this before around our
internal PMO, PSO-type structure.
We've embedded a lot of those skill sets within agencies to
help build the capability within the agency itself so that they can
get that reporting done properly.
And we've got people in multiple agencies helping with that.
I wonder how much of this is complementary to the work Treasury is doing.
But it's just another question for you.
Maybe that's something that Treasury would want to respond to as well.
Do you have a standard project controls framework?
And
if so, is that something that you think would be helpful to roll out across all
infrastructure delivery agencies?
So short answer, yes, we do.
Mm-hmm.
We have management plans across
all project controls and how we manage our projects.
Mm-hmm.
And then with that embedded services within the agencies, we share that with those
agencies, again, help build their capability.
Mm-hmm. I'm just wondering maybe for you, Chris, is
that something that Treasury has considered?
Because I know when you're thinking about gate land business, cost project controls
in the delivery space, and as a civil engineer, it's something I'm interested
in. But it's often a way of actually making sure
decisions made by project sponsors actually result in the
project getting delivered on time and budget.
So is that something that Treasury is looking into as well?
We certainly look at it annually when we consider the agencies that should be
covered by the CRD mandate.
Yeah.
So some agencies must use CRD, some agencies can use it at their
option.
So as part of that, we look at the capability, the experience resident
within those agencies-
Mm-hmm
... to inform what we send to the more expert
agency in many instances.
But can I just add one thing to that, too?
So while we're supporting mandated agencies and embedding
some of our services and practices within those-
Mm-hmm
... we're also helping non-mandated agencies as
well. So they've reached out. They see the capability gap there.
And so we're helping to bridge that gap, but also improve their
systems and processes. So it improves that reporting structure.
Sure. But just finally,
given there's obviously a good model, some agencies have their own model, do you
think it would be helpful to have at least a benchmark across Crown
infrastructure delivery entities that says this is what good project controls looks
like as a start of a team?
Yeah, I think there is no end of guidance that the agencies around the
table could support in that regard.
I think there's also a point that's become apparent through this, improving
investor assurance on just the intelligence that we have as a
system that we just don't really
make known. So the track record of agencies, the track record of SROs,
of project teams, of consultants, of contractors,
a contractor, of contractors, construction firms, and the like.
We're not really gleaning that intelligence to try and work out how to best
go to the next project.
Mm-hmm.
So I think there is a lot of value add in that space.
Yeah. All right. Thanks.
Can I just do one quick follow-up, and then I'll go to Tangy.
Just in terms of the take-up that you're getting
I think it's early days yet, but from government agencies going,
"Actually, we like the work that CID is doing.
We see the value for money, and we see the outcomes you're getting." How would you
rate that, Adam?
Look, we've got quite a long list of agencies that
we are supporting, both mandated and non-mandated.
If I was to pick on the non-mandated agencies, so
education, health,
have picked up the support. Like I mentioned before, we're rolling out those
interim inpatient buildings across the country.
We can do a lot more work there with health, and we're in conversations with them
regularly about picking up the next big project for them and
helping them,
about the capability there necessary.
It's about capacity, and we can actually help with the capacity.
So we've got a big ... You'd say it's going well.
It's going well. We could absolutely do more.
It's going well, given the environment that-
Understandably
... we're all in. And it's fair to say that
it's a real transition for somebody to be moving from
essentially that servant master type relationship to being a
commercial consultancy. So, that's a work in progress.
And of course, not every agency wants to be told that we've got some embedded
knowledge that they might benefit from.
So that's also-
We understand that one. That message was heard-
Yeah
... last year.
Tangy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you. Can I just go back to the investor assurance
process or scheme?
There are dates in there that relate to end of October, policy work to be done
first of November for it to come live.
Is there confidence that those dates will come to fruition?
Yeah.
Okay.
We're on program.
The second question is, I understand the role of the
commission in terms of basically receiving the projects for
assessment.
You outlined a couple of ways in which that might happen,
the central government agencies, or an opt-in at cost.
Is there a circumstance where there's a remit from the
commission to effectively
self-initiate or
offer a suggestion or direct or anything like that for the odd
occasion where there might be something which might benefit from going through
that process?
As far as I'm aware, that hasn't been considered as part of the
policy.
What I would say is that there are
other channels by which
the Minister for Infrastructure can direct the commission to do ...
He can direct us to do almost anything, actually, through the
legislation.
So that could be used as a way to
push a project through or otherwise.
But,
as part of the actual policy,
no, the commission wouldn't have the ability to compel agencies.
And the other one from me is, Jeff, you talked
about there is also an opportunity to, if you're seeing particular
trends as a result of projects coming through and identifying
certain things that might be helpful.
That's, I think, a proactive way of looking at things.
What is the proposal to bring that
... What's the vehicle for getting that where it needs to go or
be?
That's being worked through currently, but the vehicle is the treasury
policy on the insurance function. Yeah.
Cool.
Engines on that.
Can I just ask you a question about pipeline?
Because a lot of this is about pipeline, and I think what you said is that
somebody says the barrier is not often funding, but capability of being
able to actually do the delivery. To what degree are you seeing,
as you're developing the
picture of the amount of investment that's required across, or that's being thought
about across the country, it won't necessarily require, being thought about across
the country. To what extent are you seeing,
first able to give advice, and secondly, seeing
organizations saying, "There's a lot going on now, we'll pull
back," or, "There isn't a lot going on, maybe we'll bring something forward that we
want to do because we can see it's going to get a bit busier at a later stage."
Because that was one of the objectives of having the plan, was to try and smooth
the pipeline a little bit.
I don't have any direct examples where we've seen that.
Actually, the example of the
Hawksbay rebuild might be one, where, I know that's a
few years back, but
as part of that rebuild, quite actively used the pipeline.
And I think when we were contemplating how long is the rebuild going
to take-
Interesting
... we fed all of those projects through the pipeline and then converted
those projects into an effective workforce requirement.
And as we're doing that, we always put out those numbers next to
what the existing trend is. And when we see big bulges in the pipeline,
that's a sign that you might want to reevaluate
your program of works here. And that was done, I think, as part of the
rebuild, in part because there was an ambition to do it very quickly,
as you would expect. But the resources to get folks into that particular
area,
you would expect to have to, let's say, would have quite large inflationary
impact effects, because you'd be paying a lot to pull people into areas they're not
currently working in. So there are some examples of it.
I think that it is a space we want to get into more, I would
say, and start generating insights back
out to agencies and sectors where we see these things
misaligning.
The main point that we have been trying to make from the pipeline is
that the ambitions in the pipeline, or the planning in the pipeline,
far exceeds our ability to pay from a funding point of view.
And so we've been making these points more at an aggregate level rather than on a
project level, because we've seen them sort of
everywhere.
So that's kind of where we are currently.
That was where I was thinking. I wasn't expecting you to say how you should pull
your project-
Sure, yeah
... or you should pull your project, but be able to say, look to the market.
Look, I acknowledge at the moment that it's been pretty hard going,
but if we got to the stage where it was ramping up
too much, you might say, "Oh, hang on, just
market as a whole, this is what our picture is."
And then people can make their judgments about, "Well, maybe I should think about
whether I should bring something forward to avoid that or push it back," or
whatever it might be.
Yes. And we sort of actively gave advice of that nature during
COVID, and I would expect-
Yes, well, that was the obvious example
... we'll do the same for future years. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. That's cool.
Any other questions, Carlos?
I asked the minister about the asset management plan, the new
reform. Have you run any modeling how much it
will save or
how efficient it will be? Because on your report, you actually mentioned
you still rank fourth to last in OECD for asset management,
and also cost around 60 cents in every dollars
of future investment spending. So with the new asset
management plan or work plan or program,
what improvement we expect to see?
Yeah. So we've been talking a lot about gateway and
project assurance, but this is really talking about asset management
assurance. The way I would think about this is we want to be able to
provide confidence to decision-makers that asset owners
know and understand their assets, right?
That's what asset management
is ultimately about, the assurance side of it.
One way of thinking about that is that you,
as an asset owner, you know when your renewal cycles are coming up.
So rather than big renewal projects come through the
capital allowance or bubble up sort of unexpectedly,
you should sort of see these in a sort of consolidated way over a
long period of time. You should see those big renewal projects come
through your 10-year capital intentions plan and
slowly get closer and closer until, "Yep, we need to pull the
trigger on this one."
So I would hold the 60% number. That is an aggregate number
across all sectors.
For sectors that have lower drivers of demand, think
about places that maybe don't have population growth,
or whatever the case is. Or maybe you've got a technological advancement
in a particular sector such that you're not renewing your
infrastructure. Your numbers in those areas can be far
closer to 100%, right? And there are areas around New
Zealand where we would expect it to be much closer to 100%.
On the flip side, in areas that are very new, new technology,
data centers, like things where we're ramping up with new technology, a lot of
new population growth, you might expect that number to be far below
60%. What we're looking for is confidence that
the asset owner understands what it is for them, what the core
demand drivers are for them, when the renewal cycle is, so on and so forth.
So that's what we're trying to, I suppose, give confidence for here.
I'll just pick up on one more point around
why do this, value for money.
In the plan, we talk about the fact that sporadic maintenance is up
to three times more expensive than continuous maintenance, right?
What we're trying to do here is we're trying to get the asset owners to paint
the weather boards so that we don't have to replace them, right?
Because replacing them is much more expensive.
So that's where you're going to find value in this
program, right?
So you haven't run any modeling on how much in 10
years' time will they drop from 60 to 50% or-
We have run modeling on
a vast number of the sectors that we look at, the
17 that we look at,
through our forward guidance. So the chapter on the National Infrastructure
Plan on forward guidance uses the capital stocks from
Statistics New Zealand and provides a modeling
expectation of where we would expect to see the renewals budget
against sectors. And yes, we would like to be able to
connect that number with what we're seeing come through in asset management plans.
Okay.
Different area.
Different area. You go if you like. Yeah.
Actually for Mark and Graham. The government have failed to
roll out a promise of EV chargers around the country, so they've had to call you
guys in to try and help them out.
From the loans side of things,
is it purely a transactional role that you're playing there?
Or I'm interested in sort of regional prioritization,
where these charges are in terms of rolling out to different parts of the
country to ensure that there is a level of connection that meets need.
What is the role for the organization there?
Graham, do you want to detail on that?
Yeah. Well, there is a transactional component because we've run a transaction and
contract with two counterparties, and then there was a part of that
that actually rolled out.
The good thing about the scheme and the program is the amount of funding
that we've actually had to allocate per charger has been much less than what it was
under the current funding scheme, so that's meant we get more than what you'd
otherwise get, but considerably the more expensive DC ones because
they are rapid charging ones.
With the various partners, there is a ratio that they've got in the
contract between what they call metro and regional.
So the metros are the big four metros, and then there's the regions as well.
And then as they develop those plans, they go share those with us so we
understand the priority. Bear in mind that we're not funding the whole things.
Sure.
around that
But it's a large number, I think. It's like
480 to be rolled out.
Okay.
And then after that, there's quite a few more annual...
We're looking at doing a second round as well.
When is it likely that that information will be shared
with you in terms of what the plans are around
rollout?
Well, we've only just virtually signed the contracts.
But they've got a requirement to share, basically, an annual plan with us.
Okay.
And when we have an annual plan, you'll see when we've got our SPE, there'll be
a target number in there that we'll be aiming at.
And then, as we do our public reporting, we'll be reporting where they
pop up around the country, like you see with the mobile towers,
with maps and show the people where they're going and all that sort of stuff.
And you care to say around are they going to want to fund
charges in the area they're going to have the most use, right?
Yeah. Well, naturally, we want people to use them, yeah.
I guess the other side of that, well, not the other side, but part of that is
ensuring that usage is important, but connectivity as well,
particularly for people that live out in the regions.
Yep.
It's part of that.
Okay.
Kevin.
Thank you.
I've a particular interest in water storage.
It's touched in your plan briefly,
and it's under the
heading of irrigation. And as we
look forward,
likely lower river levels
are challenging, not only supply of irrigation, but also
supply of drinking water.
What scope has the commission got moving forward to
use as a template, the plan that you've got,
but also look at those other opportunities that might strengthen
the investment case moving forward? If you get what I mean.
So, if we look at water storage as a standalone issue in the context
of irrigation, it's one case. But if it can be combined to
look at a sustainable storage option for
drinking water for town supply,
it's arguably a different proposition.
Yeah.
I think where we would find ourselves in this one is that this is why
for the IPP, we were assessing business cases of this nature,
right? And so,
we would accept
local councils sending us business cases and running the ruler over
just these kinds of questions.
I don't have a general thing to say about this, only that for this kind of project
level advice, this is the reason why we're wanting to keep the door open
potentially,
with the assurance process to local government so that we can feed in
questions of this nature.
In the water sector,
we have really been talking about more aggregate issues that we
see from an affordability point of view, a willingness
to pay point of view, pricing and investment as an aggregate,
just like we have been in transport and showing where there are
misalignments.
What I would say to that is similar to transport and water, the search
is on for
high quality, low cost investments,
because the numbers that we see in this sector
they're big. They're really big, and they mean user
charges that will be really big, and we've seen a little bit of that
in Wellington in recent times.
Those macro numbers that we're looking at really should be
motivation to ask questions of this nature.
If we can find
ways to get more value for money,
motivation is right there.
Value for money, obviously, is highly important.
But when it comes to water storage, it's more complex than that.
And we don't have many examples in recent history where large scale water
storage can get across the ground. It's very difficult.
And,
I know that
you responded in the frame of the assurance, interestingly enough, because I did
say that that was my main focus. In an area
where I live,
we've made an attempt to get
water storage across the ground for minimum 40 years, and we still haven't really
got any further than when we started.
Got close, and it's pulled back, and
a lot of people have put a lot of effort in.
And
I guess I was just interested in the fact that you had
acknowledged it
under the
heading of irrigation. But in the context of additional uses for that,
I'm not sure that,
no criticism of you or your plan, but I'm not sure that collectively we've got our
heads around how we can actually deal with this.
And,
perhaps it is through the assurance process that councils and regions can come to
you for a bit of assistance here, but
there's going to be more than that. But anyway, I just can response there.
So thank you.
Did you have a comment to make on that?
No, only that one of the reasons why these things are
difficult, when I hear about projects that are difficult across
the line, it's because either the costs are too high and we have a
cost management issue or because on the other side, we don't have
enough funders or users of the project
such that
we could secure the revenue stream to operate and maintain it into the
future.
The more we know and understand those things, the more we can ask the
question, what if questions. What would we need to see- To
believe that this project would be a good thing to invest in.
What level of population would we need to see in the area?
What kind of demand for irrigation would we need to see such that the fixed costs
could be spread across and have lower unit costs, so it's affordable?
It doesn't need to wash its face completely, but I'd do with something
that gets somewhat close.
These kind of questions can be really useful to local communities so that
they understand where the trigger is or where the bar is and what they'd need to do
to get there.
That's actually a useful response. Thanks very much. Thank you.
But I'll just do a quick sup off water and waste, which is not quite the
irrigation side, but it's one of the areas that in, the
plan, you're actually suggesting actually the proportion of GDP
actually decline over time, and I think you've made the observation that there's a
lot of money being proposed to be spent at the moment, and sort of question whether
it's quite as much-- if they actually go too far
or too quickly. Maybe that's the issue.
I know, Raveen, you're particularly involved and I'm particularly interested in.
But, just wondered if you'd give us any observations about that we seem to have two
different drivers. One is that we've got to invest lots, and you're saying
that
get it over the right period of time.
Yeah. Well, there were earlier questions about
the pipeline and concentrated
work going out at the same time. Water will be one of those
examples
where all these entities are being set up, and they'll all go out to
market almost all at the same time, seeking
similar services, which will just drive up the
cost. So as an industry, they need to think about
where the priorities are and how they can spread the
work and actually learn from it and get scale.
So to answer your question, I think we don't have, about the irrigation, but
in the general sense,
we don't have the maturity, from my observation, for
different organizations to see their separate needs
being put into a single infrastructure where, where it can have
multiple
benefits.
Everyone seems to want to do things on their own.
And, and your earlier question about NIFCO.
NIFCO is currently working on an initiative, trying to
get small wastewater treatment plants,
serving less than three thousand people, custom designed
and made available
at a low cost across New Zealand for small communities. Yeah.
I don't know what the take-up is, but it's just started, right?
I'll be very- And similarly- Very interested to see that. Yeah.
Similarly, if we were going to put metering in, then
instead of, for example, Te Ākiwai saying, they're going to go out to the
market and it's going to cost half a billion.
If they said, "No, we're going to get someone else to provide metering as a
service," probably
off balance sheet. That sort of
thinking
is what we need, and that will drive down the cost.
Because at the moment, all these cost estimates that were put
into the water service delivery plans of councils have all
assumed that they're doing things independently, all on their own,
without creating scale by working with someone else.
They don't have to join the other council, but they can procure
with other councils. So I think that will need to come
through, because Jeff is correct.
Over the next 10 years, we're talking about 56 billion or something-
Yeah ... dollars being spent on water, and that's in addition to a
similar amount being spent on electricity.
So when, when you add all these numbers, it's like, well,
we, we can't afford all of this. So we have to be smarter. Yeah.
I've just finished. Yeah. So,
thank you for that. So can I-- So to go back to that question about pipeline.
Yeah. Is that the kind of... And I, I know that you've been focusing on big
projects to some degree, but pipeline, if you've got a whole, a huge number
of smaller projects which add up to a lot, and clearly that's water as an
example. Another one I was going to actually raise was bridges and renewal of
bridges which were all built after the Second World War, and now they're all fi-
all getting to the end of their lives all together.
Are those the kind of things that the commission can then can say to the
market as a whole, "Hey, this is-- We're seeing a, a, a big,
lift, which is an unsustainable lift, over the next five or 10
years or so. We strongly suggest actually that we actually work together
to try and spread that out a little bit so we actually don't see,
all the costs landing at once and also bidding the price up very, very
rapidly." I think we're making it transparent, and we're working with other
peak bodies. Yeah. So Water New Zealand, Ọpọ́,
the asset management professionals.
Because we can't carry all the burden ourselves.
So we, we, we get the evidence, and then we try to
influence these other entities to start having the conversation.
No, I think it's, it's... Thank you for working with others, I think really, really
important. But, yeah, it's good that you're actually onto that. Simon.
Thanks. So I'm interested in particularly this view the commission might have.
How much assurance can we have on the costs
that are assumed by, say, the new Wellington Water
Entity are actually valid,
when they're determining how much
residents, businesses need to pay?
Because if we, if we are not sure what the asset
condition is, but they appear to have come up with a price that we need to
pay in order to fix the assets,
is there any way of actually testing these assumptions?
Yeah. It sort of falls in my other role with Taumata
Arowai.
So the minister there has asked Taumata Arowai, Water Services Authority,
to get unit costs-
Wow
... and make it known to the industry
that
certain things, putting a meter in should cost about this much
Putting it in, in a rural area should cost X.
If it's in a very urbanized area with concrete pavements, it should be
around Y.
So we're working on that right now.
But the interest is definitely there to get a benchmark, because the
decision makers and all the new boards of these entities,
they don't have a benchmark to say what the numbers should
be.
Sorry.
How do they get qualified to be representatives on these boards?
They don't know what things cost.
That's a question for the councils that appoint the boards.
All right. Okay.
Oh, good question.
Further stuff on that. If we can assume that you've got places like
Wellington, which have been subject to earthquakes and other things,
maybe the assets are in poorer condition.
But it begs belief that the average residential water
bill will be $2,500 a year from next year,
in the absence of any comparable
infrastructure or asset management
plan that we have sunlight on.
Do you think that these entities should be subject to a much higher level of
assurance and potentially
regulation in some way lines companies are?
So we
do have Comcom as the economic regulator.
Right.
But the Commerce Commission will come later.
And then-
My bill will come sooner.
Exactly. So the challenge right now is when these entities are being set
up by the councils,
the amount of debt that is getting transferred, the
valuation of the assets-
Right
... and the known condition of the assets, they all need to be taken into
account in a collective manner.
Okay.
So if you say that, say for example, Wellington's assets
have got a lot of deferred investment and they're not in a good shape,
then that should mean that its asset valuation should be low
and its debt should be low. Because if you've spent a lot of money,
your debt is high because you've been spending it on your investment.
Mm-hmm.
But if your debt is high, which I think was 1.7
billion,
the asset valuation is high, which I think was 9 billion,
and you're getting all the
crap
wastewater and water pipes.
It begs the question, well,
how can these assets be worth so much and how can
the debt be so high? The question you have is, well,
which regulator
is the one that gets involved-
Mm-hmm
... to say, "Is this right or is this not right?"
Mr. Burns.
I suspect you know the answer, Simon, to your question.
I go, "Terrible." I mean, I've got to
defend the water companies to some extent, although I don't really want to, but
when you're doing projects underground and there's
where the contractors lose all their money, and it's really very
difficult to actually know the general ground conditions
are going to be like, and contractors won't take a risk on it.
Yeah.
So I suspect a lot of these water companies are just using unit
rates on projects that haven't been designed.
And, I mean, it's only once contractors start probably,
they're,
hoeing or wrestling in the ground, are they going to really understand what the
cost is going to be like.
So very hard to get really accurate
costings on
global projects.
Under- understand that. I think just coming back to the point
that Mr. Janaram made, which is that,
at the moment, there is no economic regulator that has
oversight over the assumptions that are made by
councils when essentially creating these entities.
So if they've made a bunch of assumptions that a whole bunch of debt's
coming in, here's the value of the asset, here's what your future work program
looks like, take into account uncertainty.
As a rate payer,
I can't
see any sunlight. I don't know how this was arrived at,
and it doesn't sound like there's a regulator that is ready to
go to assess
those assumptions.
The burden actually falls on the board.
If you look at the theory,
the board should be saying, because there's a transaction
here between an entity, a company,
and so it's the board's responsibility.
So when I was at Manukau Water, when Manukau Water was set up, the board of
Manukau Water didn't just accept the numbers that Manukau City gave them.
They verified the numbers and accepted
independently verified numbers.
Mm-hmm.
That the valuation is not X, it's actually Y.
And the debt is not this, it's this.
So
the burden, I believe, this is my personal view, falls on the
board
as part of that transaction because there
will be a
sale and purchase agreement of the assets being moved from the council
to the entity, even though it will be a paper transaction.
Mm-hmm.
There's obligations on board members.
That's great.
And yes, of course, you can have regulators as well.
It's a great starting point. Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Do I have any other questions there?
No.
Okay. Look, I'll... Did you want?
You're fine.
Okay. No, look, I've got one other one, which is just around the area of growth,
paying for growth, which is an issue that we've traversed in the
past, and you've said that that's worth 30 to 50%, and you've followed up very
well with the answer and questions to substantiate that number.
Just how do we get better at doing that?
And the one project I'm particularly thinking of, and when you mentioned it
earlier, a very large and expensive prospective project, a second
harbor crossing. But there might be other projects which would be in that
category, but how do we get a better arrangement for growth, paying for growth?
And I know that at the moment we've got some agencies which cannot do that.
I think we are moving towards legislation to do that.
I'm thinking of it particularly the likes of NZTA.
But any observations around how we can do better about
growth paying for growth?
Yeah. So, hopefully as we're traversing all of these issues, I'm hoping that
you see a consistent way that we're thinking about capital
investments.
We have a situation here where we're adding more
capital to our cities. We're growing, right?
More pipes, more roads,
more maintenance, more renewal liability into the
future. But we are not collecting
a commensurate amount of revenue to go with that growth, right?
So the number you've put out there is 30% to 50%.
That is the additional
rate revenue from the marginal person into
many of our cities, divided by the
infrastructure maintenance and renewal cost of having them there.
So, for many asset owners out there, they try and
grow their way into better positions on their balance sheet.
Our cities are doing the opposite. Growth is hurting their balance sheet.
How do we get better at this? We essentially need to find places to
grow that are more commercial, right, that require less
infrastructure per unit of growth rather than more units
of infrastructure per unit of growth.
And I think, to my mind, I step back from the planning
process that local government often goes through.
Having been through it myself, I used to work at Auckland Council.
And oftentimes, the finances of any
particular growth path are
almost thought about separately from the planning of where the
growth should go, right? And we think about, well, what is the infrastructure
charge that will enable this? That happens after the planning process
has gone through.
What I think we need to get better at is bringing the
finances at the front end of our planning process, so that
when we say we're going to grow out here in a certain location, people
are asking, "Well, is this a commercial area to grow?
Is this going to help our balance sheet?
Is this going to make the city stronger financially?
Or actually, does this require higher rates increases
to subsidize those levels of growth?" And I think what our work has
demonstrated, at least in the information we can find, is that we're
doing a lot of the latter and less of the former.
I've heard the argument from, particularly from Auckland, but I've also heard it
from quite a number of other councils as well, that they do the
planning, they work out where they think growth ought to go, and then we have a
process which gets around that. It's called private plan changes or
fast tracking for housing.
And then you have things which are out of area.
They don't get enough investment made in the infrastructure, and
often that leaves a future liability for the council to pick up at
some stage, which undoubtedly will contribute to 30% to
50%. Have we actually got these things lined up properly?
My view would be if your infrastructure pricing is done right,
you have prices that reflect costs of growth, then you're
probably going to be okay.
You can have a private plan change that requires a lot of
infrastructure, but if the developers can see what the price of that is and they're
prepared to do it anyway,
then
there's obviously externalities to think about.
But putting those
aside for a second,
that is one path. But what I see happening is
private plan changes going ahead and local governments not necessarily
knowing what the infrastructure cost will be or using charges,
development contributions that appear to be way too low
for what the cost is. And then when they realize what the liability is,
this is alarm bells are ringing.
So, that sort of motivates the reason why I'm saying we actually need to get on
top of the pricing of infrastructure earlier in the
process.
That's very helpful. No, thank you.
And I think I have one other area that I just wanted to ask about,
and it's just the issue around, I think,
we heard about sweating assets, I think.
Pamela, you mentioned sweating assets earlier. I've heard that before.
I'm not sure it entirely worked very well.
What do you mean by that? How far do you think we should be going, and how far,
perhaps I'll get some other views as well, how far do you think we should not be
going?
I don't think you go as far as having to replace the
weatherboards on the house, so that's-
That's a pretty good idea.
It's taking it, look, it's understanding
the life of certain infrastructure that
you put in, like a vertical build, for example, like air conditioning units or
whatever.
So understanding the life of those, the life cycle of those, the maintenance,
keeping up the maintenance regime for those.
But doesn't necessarily mean at year 10 you're going to put in
another one necessarily. So if there's a bit more life in it, then you
keep going with it.
I think the key point would be when you're sweating the asset, because you should
if you can,
what do you do with the money that you were going to use to renew it?
Because if
you're sweating the asset and that money gets used for something else,
then the renewal of the asset that you've been
sweating comes up and you are left with no money.
And that's a problem with a lot of agencies.
That while they're sweating the assets, the money that they've saved
gets used to build something else.
And then when the assets have failed, they're looking around to say,
"Well, where's the money now?" Because it's gone.
Mm-hmm.
So you need good financial discipline To understand
what's happening with the money that should've been used for the assets.
Sorry, I think this is a really important point.
So
when we think of... There's this question for central government of what is
the capital allowance, what is it funding?
In theory, renewals should be funded out of
baselines. There should be saving of
depreciation so that when the renewal cycle comes along, the
agency is able to get through it.
What we're seeing in practice is that a lot of the renewals, as Raveen's just
said, are coming to the capital allowance, which at least to
my mind, should be for new capital services.
Now,
if you're paying for your renewals out of the new capital services fund, you can
imagine that there will be a
squeeze on new capital services.
The commission has sort of talked about a future where we have more
confidence that agencies are able to fund their
renewals through baselines in the way that a local government is
cash funding depreciation, so that the capital allowance is more of a
clean new services approach.
But that requires a lot of the stuff we see in
here, good data around what those renewal cycles look like,
visibility over when these things are going to come up.
We need to be able to see all of that to actually get into that world.
I don't know, Chris, if you want to comment on that.
No, that was a model answer. Thank you, Jeff.
We do see a significant part of the capital budget
subscription being renewals as opposed to new assets, as Jeff mentioned.
I think hope, though, is through the asset management planning changes and the
long-term investment plans really interrogating the future intentions from
agencies. Because as mentioned,
many government agencies are funded for depreciation.
That depreciation often goes anywhere but maintaining the asset
that it generated in the first place.
And by the time the asset is fully exhausted, we see the full cost coming back to
the center for funding.
And it ends up going to operating costs, doesn't it?
Yeah.
More nurses, more doctors, more teachers.
Whatever.
And it just gets spent. So just to finish that bit off for me, and then I've got
one quick question, Carlos. So if you've got very long life
assets, I don't know how you account for those things in terms of, let's say you
start from scratch. I know we're not doing that now because most of our assets are
now quite mature. But if you've got an asset that's going to last 100 years,
and you're starting collecting depreciation from day one.
You're not going to replace that until it's 100 years old. You might not do...
No, if it's pipe, you might do very little maintenance on the way through.
You might do a little bit, but
where is that money going to be sitting? How do you account for that?
We used to talk about jam jars in local government.
We-
Well, it should be sitting in the-
We paid them
... it should be sitting in the balance sheet as retained earnings.
It's because you've depreciated it.
It will be sitting somewhere, and but that's where the temptation comes to spend
it.
Exactly.
Right? Because people who don't understand think, "Well, we've got money."
So it used to happen in councils, "Let's do a library." Well, that was
for renewing the water assets.
Yeah. Well aware of those.
I mean, but-
Yeah, sorry.
No, go on. Sorry.
I was just going to say, somebody mentioned the Harbor Crossing renewal and
capacity extension there. That is the most
extreme example of this, right? And it's an interesting one because it is so
large, it actually pushes around many things on the capital
budget. But it's actually,
that is exactly what we're kind of grappling with
on that project.
Mm-hmm. So my question probably particularly, Chris, for you from a treasury point
of view, is if you've got government agencies which are trying to stack up,
they want to replace a hospital, whatever it might be.
They're trying to stack up somehow that depreciation against the
last hospital, last set of hospitals or whatever it might be.
Mm-hmm.
How does that get held? If we move to that model, how does that get held
as opposed to treasury/government/somebody going, "Oh, good, we've got some
money. I'm going to spend that." And then you're back to the same position you in
20 years' time when you want to actually do something with that hospital or-
Yeah
... whatever it might be.
So just going back to a comment you made earlier.
Even the brand-new assets, there is still maintenance to be done.
So if you had the 100-year example that you gave, 2% maintenance spend on a
brand-new asset is not unrealistic.
So,
just because it's brand new doesn't mean that we don't spend to keep it in the
condition that we expect it to be,
even in those early years. But to Raveen's point, there is the
retentions on balance sheet.
But across government, we do have different
arrangements for different agencies.
So some agencies are depreciation funded, and they could do
that, or they could spend the money on operating.
Some aren't. The depreciation isn't actually paid at the center.
So there is some thinking that is going on in the space of
depreciation on how we can have that assurance, but still maintain
the flexibility and that closeness to the services, such that they can be
maintained, and they don't need to return to the center to do a paint job every
18 months, 24 months.
So as we go through this whole process, the brave new world of good asset
management planning, you're going to have to be thinking about how the financial
arrangements and accounting-
We'll have better visibility on asset condition,
far better understanding of long-term investment planning,
and then we need the depreciation and that kind of administrative arrangement to
support that.
That'd be very exciting.
Yeah. And I would say that when the audits are done,
I think it's the responsibility of the auditor to...
This deserves scrutiny
and needs to be highlighted.
Yeah. Loudly, which is not what they've been doing.
Carlos.
All right. First of all, just want to welcome Professor Bell to first time
coming to scrutiny week for Whau City
Committee. So I would like to ask you a question.
So-
So,
obviously your team had delivered quite a few major projects in the
past few years. So if there's one thing you can change or
one thing you want to see improvement, which area would you love to see
changes so we can improve the productivities and efficiency?
I have just one word for that. Begins with P, which is the
pipeline one that we've been dancing around beautifully.
Once the planning hygiene is sorted, and I think we're on our way
to making that more visible, aren't we?
And especially the financial support and education upskilling.
I think the clarity of the pipeline for industry is what's
needed
in order to deliver. Yeah. It's the lack of
visibility which is sending our people offshore.
Mm-hmm.
I think we're all aware of the problem.
Hmm.
Okay. Tom, you had a question?
Just clarification on that one. So
given that I think the minister's been absolutely clear that we do have a pipeline,
that it is visible,
and that
Chief Cooper's been clear that financing isn't a barrier, it's funding.
Would it
be more accurate to say that, if we want to
retain skills and capability in New Zealand, that we need to have more
assurance about where funding is coming from and be explicit about those
trade-offs,
rather than having assurance about whether there is a list of projects or not,
that I think we can all see if we just go online.
Yeah, we've always said that the pipeline needs to be credible.
So at the moment, it's a wish list.
Mm-hmm.
So we've got lots of projects in there which we cannot afford.
They're not funded, right?
They called them options, though.
Yeah, they're options. So you can separate those.
All right.
But
the
confidence that Pam is talking about, which the industry is talking about,
is the confidence that there's some certainty that those
projects will happen around the time that we're saying it will.
Doesn't happen.
So there's a bulge, right?
The bulge keeps moving.
So people talk, the water industry is talking about $56, $60
billion
over 10 years. They're not going to do $6 billion next
year. To the year after next, it won't be six either.
So there's a bulge.
And they probably won't be doing $12 billion a year at any point either.
No, no.
To catch up.
So that's the problem.
Okay. Look, that's really helpful. Thank you.
Thank you. Look, I think we've probably reached the end of the questions.
We did wonder earlier whether there will be some merit in having
particularly the infrastructure commission back to talk about the government's
response to the commission. Do you think that's something that's worth us doing?
Yeah, we-
We're in your hands.
Yeah.
Okay. But you think, because obviously you'll have some thoughts about the response
as well, and
if you want to give us a quick highlight response, the response, if you've seen it.
But if not, then we're to ask you to come back and talk to that at a later
stage.
Yeah. I think the initial response has been we feel that it's positive, that
we're happy, but we will go and look at the details.
If you can give us, go away and give a bit of thought to that, and if there are
things which you think will be worthwhile exploring a bit more with you, then we'd
be delighted to do so.
Okay.
Yeah. But otherwise, look, thank you all very much. Really appreciate it.
It's been quite a long session, but
I'll give you back half an hour. Close to half an hour, and
hopefully you can go and enjoy it.
Thank you.
Thanks everyone.
Thank you all. Thanks for the work you do.
Thank you.
I think, colleagues, we've just got to...